SOURCE: National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), Government of India
DOCUMENT: National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods (2008)
ORIGINAL URL: https://nidm.gov.in/pdf/guidelines/floods.pdf
STATUS: Official Government of India publication (public domain / government work)
NOTE: This extract covers Chapter 1 (Floods - Status and Context) and Chapter 2
(Institutional Framework and Financial Arrangements, through Section 2.3.9).
The source PDF extraction was capped at this point - Chapters 3-10 and the
annexures (covering prevention/mitigation measures, flood forecasting/warning,
response, recovery, capacity building, financial arrangements etc.) are NOT
included here. For the complete document, download directly from the URL above
or from ndma.gov.in.
======================================================================

Management Guidelines
Management of Floods

National Disaster 
Management Guidelines
Management of Floods
National Disaster Management Authority
Government of India

Summary of Action Points
V
Mission
To minimise vulnerability to 
floods and consequent loss of 
lives, livelihood systems, property 
and damage to infrastructure and 
public utilities.

Summary of Action Points
VII
Contents
Mission V
Contents VII
Foreword XI
Acknowledgements XIII
Abbreviations XV
Executive Summary XIX
Overview of the Guidelines XXIX
1 Floods-Status and Context 1
1.1 The Flood Hazard 1
1.2 Regions in the Country Prone to Floods 2
1.3 Flooding/Drainage Congestion/Erosion in Andaman and Nicobar 3
 Islands and Lakshadweep
1.4 Flash Floods 3
1.5 Areas Prone to Floods 4
1.6 Damages Caused by Floods 4
1.7 Drainage Congestion and Water-logging 5
1.8 River Erosion 5
1.9 Urban Flooding 6
1.10 Littoral Drift in River Estuaries 6
1.11 Snowmelt/Glacial Lake Outbursts, Formation and Subsequent Bursting 6
 of Landslide Dams
1.12 Monsoon/Cyclones/Cyclonic Circulations 7
1.13 Cloudbursts 7
1.14 International Dimensions of the Flood Hazard 7
1.15 Past Initiatives of the Government of India 8
1.16 Implementation of the Recommendations of the Experts’ 9
 Committees/Working Groups/Task Forces
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
VIII
1.17 Achievements in Respect of Flood Management 10
1.18 Gaps in Flood Management 10
1.19 Approach to Guidelines 11
1.20 Action Plan 13
2 Institutional Framework and Financial Arrangements 14
2.1 Constitutional Provisions 14
2.2 National Institutions/Agencies 14
2.3 State-level Organisations 20
2.4 Techno-economic Appraisal of Flood Management Schemes 22
2.5 Funding of Flood Management Schemes 22
2.6 Flood Insurance 24
2.7 Action Plan 25
3 Flood Prevention, Preparedness and Mitigation 26
3.1 Introduction 26
3.2 Structural Measures for Flood Management 26
3.3 Inspection, Rehabilitation and Maintenance 30
3.4 Action Plan for Structural Measures 31
3.5 Non-structural Measures 32
3.6 Integrated Water Resources Management 32
3.7 Action Plan for Non-structural Measures 33
3.8 Medical Preparedness 34
4 Flood Forecasting and Warning in India 36
4.1 Concept 36
4.2 Methodology 36
4.3 The Central Water Commission’s Flood Forecasting Network in India 37
4.4 Expansion and Modernisation of Flood Forecasting Services 38
4.5 Coordination amongst the Central Water Commission, India 39
 Meteorological Department and the States
4.6 International Cooperation 39
4.7 Action Plan for Flood Forecasting and Warning 41
Contents
Summary of Action Points
IX
5 Dams, Reservoirs and Other Water Storages 42
5.1 Introduction 42
5.2 Natural Detention Basins 42
5.3 Dams and Reservoirs 42
5.4 Regulation of Reservoirs 43
5.5 Dam Safety Aspects 44
5.6 Action Plan 45
6 Regulation and Enforcement 46
6.1 Flood Plain Zoning 46
6.2 Incentives and Disincentives to States for Enacting and 48
 Enforcement of Flood Plain Zoning Regulation
6.3 Encroachment into the Waterways and Natural Drainage Lines 48
6.4 Bye-laws for Buildings in Flood Prone Areas 48
6.5 Legal Framework for Making Infrastructure Flood Resilient 48
6.6 Survey of Flood Prone Areas 49
6.7 Wetlands: Conservation and Restoration 50
6.8 Watershed Management Including Catchment Area Treatment 50
 and Afforestation
6.9 Coordination and Enforcement 50
6.10 Action Plan 51
7 Capacity Development 52
7.1 Flood Education 52
7.2 Target Groups for Capacity Development 53
7.3 Capacity Building of Professionals 53
7.4 Training 53
7.5 Research and Development 54
7.6 Documentation 55
7.7 Action Plan for Capacity Building 56
8 Flood Response 57
8.1 Introduction 57
8.2 Emergency Search and Rescue 58
8.3 Emergency Relief 58
8.4 Incident Command System 59
Contents
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
X
8.5 Community-based Disaster Preparedness and Response 59
 Coordination among Various Organisations
8.6 Involvement of the Corporate Sector 59
8.7 Specialised Teams for Response 60
8.8 Improving Flood Response 61
8.9 Emergency Logistics 61
8.10 Emergency Medical Response 62
8.11 Action Plan for Strengthening Flood Response 63
9 Implementation of Guidelines – Preparation of Flood Management Plans 64
9.1 Flood Management Plans 64
9.2 Flood Management Plans of Central Ministries and Departments 66
9.3 Flood Management Plans of State Governments 66
9.4 Flood Management Plans of Nodal Agencies 67
9.5 Implementation of Flood Management Plans 67
9.6 Action Plan 68
10 Summary of Action Points 69
 Annexures 86
Annex-I/I Map Showing Flood Prone Areas 86
Annex-I/II State-wise Break-up of Flood Prone Areas 87
Annex-I/III Statement Showing Damage Due to Floods/Heavy Rains 89
Annex-I/IV Estimate of Area Suffering from Drainage Congestion/Water -logging 91
Annex-I/V Brief Particulars of Important Committees/Working Groups/Task Forces 92
 on Flood Management Appointed by the Government of India
Annex-I/VI Important Recommendations of the Rashtriya Barh Ayog as Identified 103
 by the Experts Committee and Status of their Implementation
Annex-I/VII State-wise Details of Achievements on Structural Measures 111
Annex- IV/I Flowchart for Flood Forecasting and Early Warning 112
Annex-V/I Case Study for Effectiveness of Hirakud Dam in Flood Moderation 113
Annex-VI/I Model Bill for Flood Plain Zoning 116
 Core Group on Management of Floods 126
 Extended Core Group on Management of Floods 127
 List of Persons who Contributed to the Development of the 129
 Guidelines on Flood Management
 Contact Us 135
Contents
Summary of Action Points
XI
Foreword
India is highly vulnerable to floods and out of the total geographical area of 329 mha, more 
than 40 mha is flood prone. Floods are recurrent phenomenon, which cause huge loss of lives 
and damage to livelihood system, property, infrastructure and public utilities. It is a cause for 
concern that the flood related damages are showing an increasing trend. The average annual 
flood damage during the last 10 years (1996-2005) was Rs. 4745 crore as compared to Rs. 1805 
crore, the corresponding average for the last 53 years. This can be attributed to many reasons 
including rapid increase in population and urbanisation coupled with growing developmental and 
economic activities in the flood plains and global warming. 
From the past experience, it is observed that though the various Expert Committees/
Working Groups headed by eminent dignitaries have made several useful recommendations/
suggestions, these have mostly remained unimplemented, which is a cause of concern. These 
guidelines have highlighted those recommendations and actions required to be taken on 
them.
While formulating these guidelines, we have involved 161 experts from various concerned 
central ministries and departments, state governments, scientific and technical insitutions, 
academics, professionals and eminent personalities from the society and non-governmental 
organisations and tried to make the document as comprehensive as possible, so that it provides 
the desired direction in the work to be done in flood management in the country. The central 
ministries and state governments can accordingly make their Disaster Management plans 
based on these guidelines, which will minimise the vulnerability to floods and ensure better 
preparedness over a defined period of time.
I express my deep appreciation of the commitment of various stakeholders for their 
wholehearted support and cooperation in the preparation of these guidelines. I would also like 
to commend the significant contribution made by the Ministry of Water Resources and Central 
Water Commission and the members of the Core and the Extended Groups, for their long hours 
of work in drafting and finalising the guidelines.
Vice Chairman
National Disaster Management Authority
Government of India
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
XII
I also wish to express my sincere appreciation of the efforts of Dr. Mohan Kanda, Member, 
NDMA, and his team for formulation and finalisation of these guidelines.
New Delhi General NC Vij
17 January, 2008 PVSM, UYSM, AVSM (Retd)
 
Summary of Action Points
XIII
Acknowledgements
I am thankful to the Core Group members for their unrelenting cooperation in the extensive 
effort that went into the formulation of the National Guidelines for Flood Management by the 
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA). I would like to place on record the significant 
contributions made by the Ministries of Water Resources, Earth Sciences, the Central Water 
Commission, the India Meteorological Department, governments of the States and the administration 
of the Union Territories from time to time.
I express my sincere thanks to the representatives of the other central ministries and 
departments concerned, representatives of the scientific and technical institutions, eminent 
professionals, the National Institute of Disaster Management, non-governmental organisations 
and the representatives of the Corporate Sector for their valuable inputs which helped us improve 
the content and the presentation of this document. 
The efforts of Shri S. K. Agrawal, Specialist (Floods), NDMA and former Member, CWC in 
providing knowledge-based technical inputs to the core group and drafting the report, deserve 
high appreciation.
I thank Shri H.S Brahma, Additional Secretary and the staff of the NDMA for their cooperation. 
My thanks are also due to my staff including Sarvashri G .V Satyanarayana, Dr. Pavan Kumar 
Singh, M. Kankaji, Ms Sajneet Kaur, Sarvashri Anil Kumar and Mahipal Singh Khatana for their 
help in organising the various workshops, meetings and preparation of this document. I also 
thank Mr. Sanjay Shrivastva and Ms. Neena Gupta who have helped me in editing the report.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to General N.C Vij, PVSM, UYSM, AVSM 
(Retd.), Vice Chairman, NDMA, and all Members of the NDMA for their patient reading of 
various drafts, constructive criticism, guidance and suggestions in formulating these guidelines.
Member
National Disaster Management Authority
Government of India
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
XIV
It is hoped that this humble effort will prove useful to the Central Ministries and Departments, 
the States and the Union territories in formulating effective Flood Management Plans that will 
improve the management of this phenomenon in the future. 
New Delhi Dr. Mohan Kanda, IAS (Retd.)
17 January, 2008
Summary of Action Points
XV
AICTE All India Council of Technical Education
AIR All India Radio
ALTM Air-born Laser Terrain Mapping
ARMVs Accident Relief Medical Vans
ARG Automatic Rain Gauge
ATI Administrative Training Institute
BCM Billion Cubic Meter
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards
BMTPC Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 
BRO Border Roads Organisation
CAT Catchment Area Treatment
CBO Community Based Organisation
CBRI Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education
CD Civil Defence
CFCB Central Flood Control Board
CFI Construction Federation of India
COA Council of Architecture
CPWD Central Public Works Department
CRF Calamity Relief Fund
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
cumec cubic meter per second
cusec cubic feet per second
CWC Central Water Commission
CWPRS Central Water and Power Research Station
D Quarter ending December
DAE Department of Atomic Energy, 
DART Disaster Assistance Response Team
DD Doordarshan
Abbreviations
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
XVI
DDMA District Disaster Management Authority
DEM Digital Elevation Model
DI Drainage Improvement
DM Disaster Management
DMA Disaster Management Authority
DMS Disaster Management Support
DMP Disaster Management Plan
DST Department of Science and Technology
DPR Detailed Project Report
DRM Disaster Risk Management
DSS Decision Support System
DVC Damodar Valley Corporation
DWR Doppler Weather Radar
EEP Emergency Evacuation Plan
EOC Emergency Operations Centre
EREC Earthquake Risk Evaluation Centre
FF Flood Forecasting
FF and W Flood Forecasting and Warning
FM Flood Management
FMO Flood Meteorological Office
FMP Flood Management Plan
FP Flood Protection
FRL Full Reservoir Level
J Quarter ending June
GFCC Ganga Flood Control Commission
GIS Geographical Information System
GLOFs Glacial Lake Outburst Floods
GOI Government of India
GSI Geological Survey of India 
ha Hectare
HFL Highest Flood Level
HPC High Power Committee on Disaster Management
HSC Hazard Safety Cell
Abbreviations
Summary of Action Points
XVII
HUDCO Housing and Urban Development Corporation 
ICS Incident Command System
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation
IDNDR United Nations International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction 
IDRN Indian Disaster Resource Network
IE(I) Institution of Engineers (India)
IIT Indian Institute of Technology
IMD India Meteorological Department
IIA Indian Institute of Architects
IWRM Integrated Water Resources Management 
M Quarter ending March
mha major accident hazard
MEA Ministry of External Affairs
MES Military Engineering Services
MFR Medical First Responder
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs
mha million hectares
MHRD Ministry of Human Resource Development 
MOA Ministry of Agriculture
MOD Ministry of Defence
MOES Ministry of Earth Sciences
MOHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
MOR Ministry of Railways
MOWR Ministry of Water Resources
MOSRTH Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways
MWL Maximum Water Level
NCC National Cadet Corps
NCDM National Committee on Disaster Management 
NCMP National Common Minimum Programme
NCMRWF National Centre of Medium Range Weather Forecasting
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority
NR National Reserve
NDRF National Disaster Response Force
Abbreviations
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
XVIII
NEC National Executive Committee 
NFMI National Flood Management Institute
NGO Non-governmental Organisation
NHAI National Highways Authority of India
NIC National Informatics Centre
NIDM National Institute of Disaster Management
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NRSA National Remote Sensing Agency
NSS National Service Scheme
NWA National Water Academy
NWP National Water Policy
NYKS Nehru Yuvak Kendra Sangathan
PRI Panchayati Raj Institution
PVO Private Voluntary Organisation
QRMT Quick Reaction Medical Team
RBA Rashtriya Barh Ayog
RF Rainfall
RM River Management
RMC Regional Meteorological Centre
RR Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
RRC Regional Resource Centre
S Quarter ending September
SDMA State Disaster Management Authority
SOI Survey of India
SOP Standard Operating Procedure
SW South-west
TAC Technical Advisory Committee
TF Task Force
UGC University Grants Commission
ULB Urban Local Body
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
WL Water Level
WAPCOS Water and Power Consulting Services India Ltd
Abbreviations
Summary of Action Points
XIX
Introduction 
Following the enactment of the Disaster 
Management Act, 2005, (DM Act, 2005) the 
Government of India (GOI) constituted the National 
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) as the 
apex body for Disaster Management (DM) in India 
with the mandate, inter alia, for laying down policies 
and guidelines on DM. At the national level, there 
is to be a paradigm shift from the erstwhile reliefcentric and post-event syndrome to pro-active 
prevention-, mitigation- and preparedness-driven 
DM. These efforts will conserve developmental 
gains and also minimise loss of lives, livelihood 
systems and property. These Guidelines have been 
evolved by the NDMA, through a nine-step process. 
This approach ensures that all contemporary 
knowledge, experience and information are taken 
on board, clear destinations are identified, and 
road maps drawn with milestones duly marked off 
through a wide consultative process, involving all 
the stakeholders. Recognising the gravity of the risk 
and vulnerability of India to floods, the NDMA, soon 
after its constitution initiated a series of consultations 
with the various stakeholders to develop Guidelines 
for strengthening the existing arrangements for flood 
preparedness, mitigation, and post-flood emergency 
response, relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction. 
Senior representatives from the Central Ministries/
Departments and the state governments, related 
agencies, academics and professionals attended 
these meetings. The meetings acknowledged that, 
while several significant initiatives had been taken 
by government agencies in the past for addressing 
the risk and vulnerability of India to floods, it is 
necessary to undertake measures for the evolution 
of a holistic and integrated strategy to address 
the critical factors that accentuate flood risk. On 
the basis of these deliberations, the NDMA has 
prepared these Guidelines for Flood Management 
(FM), to assist the ministries and departments of 
the GOI, the state governments and other agencies 
in preparing Flood Management plans (FMPs).
Vulnerability to Floods
Floods have been a recurrent phenomenon 
in India and cause huge losses to lives, properties, 
livelihood systems, infrastructure and public utilities. 
India’s high risk and vulnerability is highlighted by 
the fact that 40 million hectares out of a geographical 
area of 3290 lakh hectares is prone to floods. On 
an average every year, 75 lakh hectares of land 
is affected, 1600 lives are lost and the damage 
caused to crops, houses and public utilities is Rs. 
1805 crores due to floods. The maximum number 
of lives (11,316) were lost in the year 1977. The 
frequency of major floods is more than once in five 
years. Floods have also occurred in areas, which 
were earlier not considered flood prone. An effort 
has been made in these Guidelines to cover the 
entire gamut of Flood Management. Eighty per 
cent of the precipitation takes place in the monsoon 
months from June to September. The rivers bring 
heavy sediment load from the catchments. These, 
coupled with inadequate carrying capacity of the 
rivers are responsible for causing floods, drainage 
congestion and erosion of river-banks. Cyclones, 
cyclonic circulations and cloud bursts cause flash 
floods and lead to huge losses. The fact that some 
of the rivers causing damage in India originate in 
neighboring countries, adds another complex 
dimension to the problem. Continuing and largescale loss of lives and damage to public and private 
property due to floods indicate that we are still to 
develop an effective response to floods. These 
Executive Summary
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
XX
Guidelines have been prepared to enable the 
various implementers and stakeholder agencies to 
address effectively the critical areas for minimising 
flood damages.
Urban Flooding
Flooding in the cities and the towns is a recent 
phenomenon caused by increasing incidence of 
heavy rainfall in a short period of time, indiscriminate 
encroachment of waterways, inadequate capacity 
of drains and lack of maintenance of the drainage 
infrastructure. Keeping in view the fact that the 
problem is becoming more severe and losses are 
mounting every year, the subject of urban flooding 
has been recognised by the NDMA as one meriting 
exclusive attention and separate guidelines for its 
management are being prepared and will be issued 
soon. 
Action Plans at Various Levels
These Guidelines have been drawn up in the 
context of a rigorous risk management framework 
to ensure the effectiveness of action plans that are 
developed by various agencies. All key agencies, 
including the central ministries, and departments, 
state governments, local bodies including Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs), and Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) like metropolitan development authorities, 
municipal corporations, municipal councils and 
district authorities will develop detailed FMPs 
based on these Guidelines. State governments 
and local authorities will play an important role in 
the formulation and effective implementation of 
such action plans. The communities and other 
stakeholders will play an important part in ensuring 
compliance to the regulations and their effective 
enforcement. The State Disaster Management 
Authorities (SDMAs) will be responsible for reviewing 
and monitoring the implementation of the action 
plans at the state-level. 
The Objectives of the Guidelines
These Guidelines rest on the following 
objectives aimed at increasing the efficacy of the 
FMPs, which will be prepared at various levels:
1. Shifting the focus to preparedness by 
implementing, in a time-bound manner, 
an optimal combination of technoeconomically viable, socially acceptable 
and eco-friendly structural and nonstructural measures of FM.
2. Ensuring regular monitoring of the 
effectiveness and sustainability of various 
structures and taking appropriate measures 
for their restoration and strengthening.
3. Continuous modernisation of flood 
forecasting, early warning and decision 
support systems.
4. Ensuring the incorporation of flood resistant 
features in the design and construction of 
new structures in the flood prone areas. 
5. Drawing up time-bound plans for the flood 
proofing of strategic and public utility 
structures in flood prone areas.
6. Improving the awareness and preparedness 
of all stakeholders in the flood prone 
areas.
7. Introducing appropriate capacity 
development interventions for effective 
FM (including education, training, capacity 
building, research and development, and 
documentation.)
8. Improving the compliance regime through 
appropriate mechanisms.
9. Strengthening the emergency response 
capabilities.
Executive Summary
Summary of Action Points
XXI
Earlier Initiatives of the Government of 
India
Following the unprecedented floods of 1954, 
the then Union Minister for Planning, Irrigation and 
Power placed before Parliament on 3 September 
1954, the statements on floods which set the 
objective of reducing the menace of floods. Later on, 
in a subsequent statement in Parliament on 27 July 
1956, the emphasis was laid on doing all that was 
possible to contain floods in the country. Since then 
the government has taken various initiatives and set 
up a number of committees to study the problem 
and recommend several remedial measures. The 
most important ones are the High Level Committee 
on Floods (1957), the Ministers Committee on Flood 
Control (1964), the Rashtriya Barh Ayog (1980) and 
Task Force on Flood Management/Erosion Control 
(2004). 
Institutional Framework
As per the constitutional provisions, FM is a 
state subject and as such the primary responsibility 
for flood management lies with the states. The 
central government has taken various initiatives and 
set up a number of organisations dealing with the 
floods. The most notable one is the enactment of 
the National Disaster Management Act, December 
2005 and setting up of the NDMA, which has been 
assigned to deal with all types of disasters including 
the floods. The National Executive Committee 
(NEC) with the Secretary of GOI of the ministry or 
department having administrative control of the 
subject of the DM as the Chairman and Secretaries 
of other ministries concerned and the Chief of the 
Integrated Defence Staff to the Chairman Chiefs of 
the Staff Committee (CISC) as Members, will assist 
the NDMA in the discharge of its functions and ensure 
compliance of the directions issued by the central 
government apart from preparing the National 
Disaster Management Plan. The state governments 
are to set up State Disaster Management Authorities 
(SDMAs) and State Executive Committees (SECs) 
to perform similar functions at the state level. These 
are in addition to existing organisations dealing with 
the floods in the states. 
There is a need to set up a central organisation 
to lay down policy and implement FM measures in 
consultation with the states and other stakeholders 
as floods are not confined to one state and flooding 
in one state leads to flooding in adjoining states. 
Accordingly, it has been proposed to set up River 
Basin Organisations to deal with the management 
of water resources at river basin level. It is also 
proposed to set up a National Flood Management 
Institute (NFMI) at an appropriate location in one 
of the flood prone states, to impart training to 
engineers, administrators, personnel of the police 
departments, Non-governmental Organisations 
(NGOs) and Community Based Orgnisations 
(CBOs) etc. 
Flood Prevention, Preparedness and 
Mitigation
Floods being the most common natural 
disaster, people have, out of experience, devised 
many ways of coping with them. However, 
encroachments into the flood plains over the years 
has aggravated the flood problem and a need to 
take effective and sustained FM measures has 
been felt. Various measures, structural and nonstructural, have been taken by the central and state 
governments and as a result, considerable protection 
has been provided to the people. However, more 
efforts are required in this direction and there is a 
need to put in place a techno-legal regime to make 
structures flood-proof and regulate the activities in 
the flood plains of the rivers. Flood forecasting and 
warning and Decision Support System (DSS) will be 
established on a scientific basis taking into account 
the latest technological developments in the world.
Executive Summary
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
XXII
Capacity Development and Flood Response
The central government and the state 
governments are required to take steps for capacity 
development for taking effective and sustainable 
preventive, preparatory and mitigative measures in 
pre-floods stage and effective and prompt response 
during- and post-floods stages. Appropriate 
recommendations have been made in this regard.
Activities for Minimising Flood Risk and 
Losses
The activities proposed to be undertaken 
aim at minimising the flood risk and losses and are 
to be implemented in three phases in addition to 
recurring activities.
Phase-I 
These activities include identification and 
marking of flood prone areas on maps, preparation 
of close contour and flood vulnerability maps, 
formulating plans for expansion and modernisation of 
flood forecasting and warning systems, identification 
of priority flood protection and drainage improvement 
works, identification of reservoirs for review and 
modification of operation manuals and rule curves 
and undertaking special studies on problems of 
river erosion. These will be initiated immediately and 
efforts will be made to complete them in a phased 
manner with the last of these activities scheduled for 
completion by January 2010. 
Phase-II 
These include implementation of the schemes 
for expansion and modernisation of the flood 
forecasting and warning network, execution of flood 
protection and drainage improvement schemes, 
modification and adoption of revised reservoir
operation manuals, enactment and enforcement 
of flood plain zoning regulations and planning and 
preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) 
for storage reservoirs and implementation of 
the schemes for real-time collection of hydrometeorological data on rivers in Nepal, Bhutan and 
China. These activities, which aim at implementation 
of FMPs, will commence immediately after the 
completion of the link activities of Phase-I and will 
be completed by March 2012.
Phase-III 
Implementation of activities, which include 
construction of dams and catchment area treatment 
(CAT) works in India as well as neighboring countries, 
is likely to take considerable time as they entail major 
environmental, social, inter-state and international 
implications. These need careful study and interaction 
with the stakeholders. It is envisaged that all feasible 
schemes will be completed by the year 2025.
Recurring Activities
These activities which include inspection of 
dams, embankments and other structural measures, 
execution of restoration and strengthening works 
and expansion and modernisation of flood 
forecasting and warning systems, are to be taken 
on a regular basis for ensuring the effectiveness and 
sustainability of various measures for minimising 
flood risk.
The relevance and status of various activities 
will be continuously monitored and reviewed. 
The activities will be modified, if felt necessary. 
The preparedness of the central ministries and 
departments concerned and the state governments 
will be reviewed in April/May every year and 
appropriate corrective measures will be taken 
before the commencement of the monsoon. A 
post-monsoon review will be held every year in 
November/December so as to finalise the action
Executive Summary
Summary of Action Points
XXIII
plan for preparatory measures to be implemented 
before the onset of the next monsoon. 
Flood Management Plans
It is expected that based on these guidelines 
the central ministries and departments concerned 
and the state governments will prepare their FMPs 
which will be holistic, participatory, inclusive, ecofriendly and gender-sensitive in nature and the 
implementation of which will result in a flood- resilient 
India. The plans will focus on the community and 
the collective efforts of the government and NGOs.
Important Milestones in the Road-map 
for the Implementation of the Guidelines
Phase – I (Works to Commence Immediately)
•	 Mechanismforjointformulationofforecasts
by the CWC/IMD/NRSA/states-May 2008.
•	 Identification of flood prone areas (villages/
blocks/tehsils/districts) and marking on 
national, state and district level maps by 
the Central Water Commission (CWC)/
Ganga Flood Control Commission 
(GFCC)/Brahmaputra Board and the state 
governments in collaboration with the 
National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) 
and Survey of India (SOI) - June 2008.
•	 Finalisation of plans for expansion and
modernisation of flood forecasting and 
warning systems and development of DSS 
for management of floods by the CWC, 
India Meteorological Department (IMD) 
and the state governments - June 2008.
•	 Making an assessment of the area
suffering from drainage congestion by the 
state governments- June 2008.
•	 Makingan assessment of the area suffering
from erosion by the state governmentsJune 2008.
•	 Categorization of flood disaster by NDMA/
SDMAs- June 2008.
•	 Introduction of module on FM in education
in schools/technical institutions/defence 
forces/academies, Administrative Training 
Institutes (ATIs) etc., by the Ministry 
of Human Resources Development 
(MHRD), Ministry of Defence (MOD), 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), state 
governments/SDMAs- June 2008.
•	 Documentation of floods by state
governments- June 2008.
•	 Identification of reservoirs for reviewing
and modifying the operation manuals/
rule curves by the state governments in 
consultation with the CWC, GFCC and 
Brahmaputra Board – June 2008.
•	 Amendment of building bye-laws to make
future buildings in flood prone areas floodsafe by the state governments/SDMAs and 
ULBs-June 2008. 
•	 Establishing a mechanism for intra-state
coordination by the state governments/
SDMAs-June 2008.
•	 Establishinga mechanism forjoint operation
for reservoirs on inter-state rivers by the 
state governments/SDMAs – June 2008.
•	 Establishing a system for monitoring of
landslides causing blockages in the rivers, 
by the CWC/NRSA/ state governments/ 
SDMAs-December 2008. 
•	 Preparation of FM plans by the central
ministries and departments- December 
2008.
Executive Summary
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
XXIV
•	 Preparation of FM plans by the state
governments/SDMAs- December 2008.
•	 Notification of regulation for prohibiting
reclamation of wetlands and natural 
depressions by the state governments/
SDMAs- December 2008.
•	 Carrying out special studies on problem
of erosion on the rivers Brahmaputra, 
Mahananda and Gandak by the NDMA in 
collaboration with the state governments 
and the CWC/GFCC/Brahmaputra Board 
– March 2009.
•	 Approval and beginning of implementation
of National Flood Mitigation Project by the 
NDMA/state governments – March 2009.
•	 Construction of flood shelters by the state
governments/SDMAs - March 2009.
•	 Identification and preparation of proposals
and implementation of priority Flood 
Protection and Drainage Improvement (FP 
and DI) works (embankments, anti erosion 
measures, drainage improvement works 
and sea walls/coastal protection works) 
by the state governments in consultation 
with the CWC/GFCC/Brahmaputra Board 
– June 2009.
•	 Preparation of maps to a scale of 1:10,000
with contours at an interval of 0.5 m/1.0 m 
and digital elevation model of the flood 
prone areas by the NRSA and SOI using 
satellite data and Air-borne Laser Terrain 
Mapping (ALTM) - June 2010.
•	 Preparation of flood vulnerability/flood
hazard maps by the CWC, GFCC and the 
Brahmaputra Board in collaboration with 
NRSA - January 2010.
Phase–II (Works to Commence on Completion of Link Activities in Phase–I)
•	 Institutionalising the role of CBOs, NGOs,
Women’s Groups, Youth Organisations, 
Corporate Houses and other stake 
holders in flood response by the SDMAs/
Distric Disaster Management Authorities 
(DDMAs)-June 2008. 
•	 Reorganisation /reorientation of fire and
emergency services, police forces, Civil 
Defence Organisations (CDOs), home 
guards for flood response by the SDMAs/
DDMAs-June 2008. 
•	 Raising and operationalising StateDisaster
Response Forces (SDRFs) by the SDMAsJune 2008. 
•	 Strengthening/restructuring of the GFCC
by the Ministry of Water Resources 
(MOWR)–September 2008.
•	 Strengthening/restructuring of the
Brahmaputra Board by the MOWR– 
September 2008.
•	 Enactment and enforcement of the flood
plain zoning regulation by the state 
governments – December 2008.
•	 Developing Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM) models for intrastate rivers by the state governmentsMarch 2009.
•	 Establishing a system for forecasting of
flash floods by IMD - September 2009.
•	 Developing basin wise IWRM models for
inter-state rivers by the CWC and state 
governments-September 2009.
Executive Summary
Summary of Action Points
XXV
•	 Notification of modified operation manuals/
rule curves of reservoirs identified 
under Phase – I and implementation of 
arrangements for inflow forecasts by the 
state governments and CWC – December 
2009.
•	 Implementation of the scheme on
expansion and modernisation of the flood 
forecasting network and development of 
the DSS by the CWC, IMD and the state 
governments-March 2010.
•	 Finalising Memoranda of Understandings
(MOUs) and implementation of the 
network for collection and exchange 
of hydro meteorological data including 
strengthening and modernisation of 
existing networks on rivers originating in 
Nepal, Bhutan and China by the MOWR 
and Ministry of External Affairs (MEA)– 
March 2010.
•	 Setting up of National Flood Management
Institute (NFMI) by the MOWR/NDMA – 
June2010.
•	 Examining adequacy and if required,
increasing the waterways of bridges/
culverts under roads and railways 
embankments by the Ministry of Shipping, 
Road Transport and Highways (MOSRTH), 
Ministry of Railways (MOR), Ministry 
of Defence (MOD), National Highways 
Authority of India (NHAI), Border 
Road Organisation (BRO) and state 
governments-June 2010. 
•	 Studies and consultations and finalization
of the proposal for flood insurance by the 
MOWR in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Finance (MOF), insurance companies and 
state governments and implementation of 
a pilot project – December 2008 and on 
large scale-June 2010.
•	 Preparation of DM plans for reservoirs by
the state governments – December 2010.
•	 Making public utility buildings/installations
flood-safe by the GOI, state governments 
and ULBs/PRIs-December 2010. 
•	 Establishing river basin organisations by
the MOWR and state governments-June 
2010.
•	 Preparation of DPRs for storage reservoirs
in India by the state governments/central 
organisations – December 2010 and in 
Bhutan and Nepal-March 2012.
•	 Preparation of DPRs for long-term FP and
DI measures such as embankments, antierosion measures, drainage improvement 
works, and sea walls/coastal protection 
works by the state governments/central 
organisations – December 2008 and 
completion of the works-March 2012.
Phase – III (Commences with Completion of Link Activities in Phase – II)
•	 Water shed management, Catchment Area
Treatment (CAT) and afforestation schemes 
in critical areas by the state governments/
central organisations-March 2012. 
•	 Construction of storage reservoirs by the
state governments/central organisations – 
December 2017.
•	 Negotiations with Nepal and Bhutan for
construction of reservoirs, watershed 
management, CAT and afforestation 
measures in their territories and preparation 
of DPRs and implementation of the 
schemes by the GOI and the governments 
of Nepal and Bhutan- December 2025.
Executive Summary
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
XXVI
Recurring Activities
•	 Inspections of dams, embankments
and other structural measures by the 
state governments – twice every year, 
once before monsoon (April-May) and 
second time after monsoon (NovemberDecember).
•	 Restoration/strengthening works by the
state governments–every year.
•	 Monitoring of structural measures–by the
state governments–throughout the year 
with special attention during monsoon.
•	 Expansion and modernisation of flood
forecasting and warning network and 
DSS for flood management as and when 
required.
Important Aspects of the Guidelines
While all the activities under the Guidelines 
are important for minimising flood risk and loss of 
lives and properties, the issues which need special 
attention are the following:
•	 Indiscriminate encroachment of the flood
plains of the rivers and waterways of natural 
and man-made drainage channels and 
reclamation of ponds, chaurs, lakes and 
depressions have led to increased flood 
risk to lives and properties. The regulation 
of developmental activities in these areas 
and an appropriate techno-legal regime 
based on the model bill circulated by the 
CWC, is an urgent necessity.
•	 The change in priority in use of storage
space of the multi-purpose reservoirs 
for irrigation, hydropower, drinking and 
industrial water supply by ignoring flood 
moderation has led to large scale flooding. 
The operation manuals and rule curves of all 
the reservoirs will be reviewed and modified 
to give priority to flood moderation.
•	 Flood forecasting and warning is a
non-structural measure, which aims 
at minimising losses and enabling the 
agencies concerned to plan rescue and 
relief measures. The efforts of the CWC, 
IMD, NRSA and the state governments will 
be integrated and a mechanism developed 
wherein during the monsoon, the 
representatives of all these organisations 
and the basin states work together in 
formulation and dissemination of reliable 
forecasts and warning.
 The national vision is to minimise the 
vulnerability to floods and the consequent loss of 
lives, livelihood systems, property and damage 
to infrastructure and public utilities and to build a 
safer India by developing a holistic, proactive, multidisaster and technology driven strategy for DM. 
This is to be achieved through a combination of 
preventive, mitigative and preparatory measures to 
generate a prompt and efficient response after the 
occurrence of floods. The entire process will focus 
on the community and will be sustained through the 
collective efforts of the government and NGOs.
The value of these guidelines will lie essentially, 
in the efficacy of the FMPs that will consequently 
be made and implemented by the central ministries 
and departments and the state governments.
The central government and the state 
governments will provide necessary resources, 
both financial and managerial for creating adequate 
structures at all levels to take measures required to 
minimise risk and vulnerability to floods 
Floods and famines have ravaged mankind 
from time immemorial and a vast store of knowledge 
Executive Summary
Summary of Action Points
XXVII
and experience is available on handling these 
disasters. An attempt has been made in these 
Guidelines to build on this precious heritage while, 
simultaneously, factoring in the benefits of modern 
technology and scientific advantages apart from 
emphasising the value of concerted action and 
sustained efforts at mitigation. 
Schedule of Completion of Action 
Points
The time lines proposed for the implementation 
of various activities in the guidelines are considered 
both important and desirable , especially in the 
case of those non-structural measures for which 
no clearances are required from central or other 
agencies. Precise schedules for structural measures 
will, however, be evolved in the FMPs that will follow 
at the level of central ministries/states duly taking 
into account the availability of financial, technical 
and managerial resources. In case of compelling 
circumstances warranting a change, consultation 
with NDMA will be undertaken, well in advance, for 
any adjustment, on a case to case basis.
Executive Summary

Summary of Action Points
XXIX
General
It has been recognised that, while floods 
cannot be prevented, they can certainly be managed 
to minimise loss of lives, livelihood systems, property 
and damage to infrastructure and public utilities. 
Various measures for management of floods will 
ultimately lead to reduction in vulnerability to floods. 
These guidelines on FM have been prepared keeping 
this reality in mind. Sustained efforts are required to 
address the problem to reduce the impact of floods 
in the short term and flood risk in the medium and 
the long term. So far the response to floods has 
been reactive in nature and has focused on rescue 
and relief in the post-flood situation. Preparatory, 
preventive and mitigative aspects of the FM have 
not received due attention. With the enactment of 
the DM Act, 2005 and the constitution of the NDMA, 
there has been a paradigm shift from the reactive 
response-centric regime where most of the efforts 
and resources were used for providing emergency 
response and relief after floods, to an approach 
that lays greater emphasis on efforts and resources 
for strengthening preparedness and mitigation 
through appropriate intervention apart from 
consolidating capacity for emergency response. 
This shift in approach is expected to be achieved 
with the active participation of the communities 
and the other stakeholders in all aspects of FM. 
The guidelines cover all aspects of FM and aim 
at increasing the efficacy of the FMPs that will be 
prepared by various key agencies including the 
central ministries and departments concerned, 
state governments, districts authorities, local bodies 
(both rural and urban), including PRIs, metropolitan 
development authorities, municipal corporations, 
municipal councils etc. The implementation of the 
FMPs prepared by them will result in a safer country 
capable of managing the floods effectively and thus 
promote the economic development of the flood 
prone areas in the country.
Structure of the Guidelines
These Guidelines have been divided into 10 
chapters. 
Floods: Status and Context
The first chapter is general in nature. The 
nature and extent of the flood problem in the country, 
various initiatives taken by the GOI in managing 
them, the actions required for a reasonable and 
reliable assessment of the problem and collection 
of the data for the studies leading to systematic and 
scientific planning and implementation of various 
interventions to manage floods are briefly described 
therein. 
Institutional Framework and Financial 
Arrangements
The second chapter titled ‘Institutional 
Framework and Financial Arrangements’ outlines 
the existing and proposed institutions to deal with 
the problem of floods and manage them effectively. 
It also deals with the financial system in place and 
arrangements that are proposed for meeting the 
requirement of funds for implementation of the 
various proposed interventions and FM measures, 
both structural and non-structural.
Prevention, Preparedness and Mitigation
The third chapter on flood prevention, preparedOverview of the Guidlines
National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management Of Floods
XXX
ness and mitigation presents an outline of the various types of structural and non-structural measures 
for managing the floods. Action plans for their implementation have also been prepared.
Flood Forecasting and Warning
Flood forecasting and warning (FF and W) 
is an important measure for minimising loss of 
lives and properties and assists the authorities 
concerned, in prompt and effective response 
during and after floods. These aspects have been 
dealt with in the fourth chapter and the action plan 
for the strengthening and modernisation of existing 
FF and W network as well as development of a DSS 
for management of floods has been drawn.
Dams, Reservoirs and Other Water Storages
Dams, reservoirs and other water storages, 
both natural and man-made, are an effective means 
for reducing the flood peaks in the rivers. The 
important role played by them in flood moderation 
and comprehensive mechanism for operation and 
regulation of reservoirs, which takes into account 
the international, inter-state and inter-regional 
aspects, have been dealt with in the fifth chapter. As 
large dams and reservoirs have potential for huge 
damage guidelines for ensuring safety thereof have 
also been detailed therein.
Regulation and Enforcement
Unplanned and unregulated developmental 
activities in the flood plains of the rivers and 
encroachments into the waterways have led to 
increase in flood losses as well as flood risk. The 
colossal loss of lives and property due to the 
flooding of the towns and cities and the areas which 
get flooded almost every alternate year is a recent 
phenomenon and effective steps are required for 
regulating unplanned growth in the flood plains and 
preventing encroachment in the waterways. These 
aspects have been dealt with in the sixth chapter 
titled ‘Regulation and Enforcement’. The measures 
for making the structures and buildings capable of 
withstanding the floods and serving as temporary 
shelters for the flood affected people have also 
been dealt with in this chapter. The coordination 
required among the various agencies and state 
governments for effective FM in inter-state rivers and 
among various stakeholders for effective response 
has also been highlighted.
Capacity Development
The seventh chapter on capacity development 
covers the aspects of education, training, research 
and development and documentation with respect 
to FM. The proposals for strengthening the existing 
systems are also given therein. An action plan for 
capacity development has also been formulated.
Flood Response
An effective and prompt response to floods 
is very important for minimising the loss of lives 
and properties and providing immediate relief 
to the affected people. The role of communities 
and NGOs is vital in search, rescue and relief 
operations. Immediate medical assistance to 
the affected people and steps for prevention of 
outbreak of epidemics after the floods are essential 
components of flood response. As per provisions of 
the DM Act, 2005, the GOI has constituted National 
Disaster Response Force (NDRF) for the purpose of 
specialised response to disasters. Over and above 
this, a mechanism for coordinated approach and 
efforts are required for effective response. All these 
aspects have been covered in the eighth chapter 
titled ‘Flood Response’.
Overview of the Guidlines
Summary of Action Points
XXXI
Implementation of Guidelines-Flood 
Management Plans
The NEC has been entrusted with the 
responsibility of preparing the National Plan for 
DM and getting it approved by the NDMA. These 
guidelines on FM will assist various stakeholders i.e. 
central ministries/ departments, state governments/
SDMAs, PRIs, and ULBs, DDMAs, NGOs and the 
communities at large, in the preparation of FMPs 
which, in turn, will form the basis for preparing the 
national flood management and overall DM plan. 
The factors to be taken into account while preparing 
FMPs and aspects for implementation thereof have 
been dealt with in the ninth chapter.
Summary of Action Points
The last chapter of the Guidelines lists out 
various action points to be implemented by central 
ministries and departments concerned and the 
state governments/SDMAs/DDMAs. There are, 
in all, 94 action points which will assist them in 
the formulation of FMPs and the implementation 
thereof will result in effective management of floods 
in India.
Overview of the Guidlines
Floods-Status and Context
1
1.1 The Flood Hazard
1.1.1 Floods-A Natural Disaster
Floods have been recurrent phenomena in India 
from time immemorial. Almost every year floods of 
varying magnitude affect some parts of the country 
or the other. Different regions of the country have 
different climates and rainfall patterns and, therefore, 
while some parts face devastating floods, other 
parts may, at the same time, experience drought 
conditions. The monsoon regime is a regular 
phenomenon. Year-to-year variations occur with 
regard to the onset of the monsoon, its progress 
over the Indian landmass, and the amount of rainfall 
distribution. In some years the variation is quite 
significant. Nevertheless, there is a fundamental 
regularity and dependability about the monsoon 
that sets the seasonal rhythms of life, although it 
also causes unfortunate losses across much of this 
part of the world. The annual precipitation including 
snowfall over India is estimated at 4,00,000 crore 
cubic meters (4,000 Billion Cubic Meters [BCM]) with 
the seasonal rainfall in the monsoons being of the 
order of 3,00,000 crore cubic meters (3,000 BCM). 
The Indian subcontinent receives maximum rainfall 
during the south-west (SW) monsoon (summer 
monsoon) for a period of about 100 days, starting 
from the first week of June to the end September. 
Normal area-weighed rainfall over the Indian land 
mass is 89 cms during this period. Around 80 per 
cent of the annual total rainfall over India occurs 
in the SW monsoon season. The balance (20 per 
cent) rainfall is mainly due to convective activities 
Floods-Status and Context 1
in the pre-monsoon period (March-June) in the 
form of local storms/thunderstorms, cyclones and 
post-monsoon cyclones (October-mid December). 
Winter rains/snowfall over the northern part of India 
caused by western disturbances and the northeast (NE) monsoon in the state of Tamil Nadu and 
adjoining region also contribute to the total rainfall. 
The normal annual rainfall varies from less than 600 
mms in the north-western part to over 2,500 mms 
in the north-eastern part. It varies from about 1,200 
mms in the north to 2,900 mms in the south.
1.1.2 Causes of Floods
Inadequate capacity of the rivers to contain 
within their banks the high flows brought down from 
the upper catchment areas following heavy rainfall, 
leads to flooding. The tendency to occupy the 
flood plains has been a serious concern over the 
years. Because of the varying rainfall distribution, 
many a time, areas which are not traditionally 
prone to floods also experience severe inundation. 
Areas with poor drainage facilities get flooded by 
accumulation of water from heavy rainfall. Excess 
irrigation water applied to command areas and 
increase in ground water levels due to seepage 
from canals and irrigated fields also are factors 
that accentuate the problem of water-logging. The 
problem is exacerbated by factors such as silting of 
the riverbeds, reduction in the carrying capacity of 
river channels, erosion of beds and banks leading 
to changes in river courses, obstructions to flow 
due to landslides, synchronisation of floods in the 
main and tributary rivers and retardation due to tidal 
effects.
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
2
1.1.3 Flood Dimensions
Floods have different dimensions - inundation 
due to spills over the banks, drainage congestion 
due to poor drainage characteristics and erosion 
due to changes in water courses. 
1.1.4 Flood Prone Area’s Estimate
According to the estimate of the National 
Commission on Floods, the area prone to floods 
in the country is of the order of 400 lakh hectares. 
It is considered that 80 per cent of it, i.e., 320 lakh 
hectares can be provided with a reasonable degree 
of protection.
1.2 Regions in the Country Prone to 
Floods
India can be broadly divided into the following 
four regions for a study of flood hazard. In 
addition the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and 
Lakshadweep have peculiar characteristics, which 
result in drainage congestion, flooding and erosion 
in coastal areas, as described in Para 1.3.
1.2.1 The Brahmaputra River Region:
This region consists of the rivers Brahmaputra 
and Barak and their tributaries, and covers the 
states of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Manipur, Tripura, Nagaland, Sikkim and 
the northern parts of West Bengal. The catchments 
of these rivers receive very heavy rainfall ranging 
from 1100 mms. to 6350 mms which occurs mostly 
during the months of May-June to September. As 
a result, floods in this region are severe and quite 
frequent. Further the hills, where these rivers 
originate, are fragile and susceptible to erosion and 
thereby cause exceptionally high silt discharge in 
the rivers. In addition, the region is subject to severe 
and frequent earthquakes, which cause numerous 
landslides in the hills and upset the regime of the 
rivers. The predominant problems in this region are 
cloud bursts followed by flash floods, soil erosion 
in the watershed and bank erosion along the rivers, 
flooding caused by the spilling of rivers over their 
banks, drainage congestion and the tendency of 
some of the rivers to change their courses. The 
plain areas of the region suffer from the inundation 
caused by spilling of the Brahmaputra.
1.2.2 The Ganga River Region:
The river Ganga has many tributaries, the 
important ones being Yamuna, Sone, Ghaghra, 
Raphti, Gandak, Burhi Gandak, Bagmati, Kamla 
Balan, Adhwara group of rivers, Kosi and the 
Mahananda. It covers the states of Uttarakhand, 
Uttar Pradesh, Jharkand, Bihar, south and central 
parts of West Bengal, Punjab, parts of Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh 
and Delhi. The normal annual rainfall in this region 
varies from about 600 mms to 1900 mms of which 
more than 80 per cent occurs during the SW 
monsoon. The rainfall increases from west to east 
and from south to north. The flood problem is mostly 
confined to the areas on the northern bank of the 
river Ganga. Most of the damage is caused by the 
northern tributaries of the Ganga. They spill over 
their banks and change their courses frequently. 
Even though the Ganga is a mighty river carrying 
huge discharges of 57,000 to 85,000 cubic meter 
per second, the inundation and erosion problems 
are confined to relatively few places. In general, 
the flood problem increases from the west to the 
east and from south to north. In the north-western 
parts of the region, there is the problem of drainage 
congestion. The drainage problem also exists in 
the southern parts of West Bengal. The flooding 
and erosion problem is serious in the states of 
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. In recent 
years, the states of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh 
have also experienced some incidents of heavy 
floods. The problem of flooding and drainage 
congestion is getting accentuated due to large-
Floods-Status and Context
3
scale encroachment of flood plains of the rivers for 
habitation and various developmental activities.
1.2.3 The North-west River Region:
The main rivers in this region are the Indus, 
Sutlej, Beas, Ravi, Chenab and Jhelum. These 
rivers are the tributaries of the Indus. They carry 
quite substantial discharges during the monsoon 
and also large volumes of sediment. They change 
their courses frequently and leave behind vast 
tracts of sandy waste. This region covers the 
states of Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab and parts 
of Himachal Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan. 
Compared to the Ganga and the Brahmaputra river 
regions, the flood problem is relatively less in this 
region. The major problem is that of inadequate 
surface drainage which causes inundation and 
water-logging over vast areas. Indiscriminate use 
of water for irrigation and development of low-lying 
areas and depressions has created problem of 
drainage congestion and water logging.
1.2.4 The Central India and Deccan Region:
Important rivers in this region are the Narmada, 
Tapi, Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna and Cauvery. 
These rivers have mostly well defined and stable 
courses. They have adequate capacities within the 
natural banks to carry the flood discharge except in 
the delta area. The lower reaches of the important 
rivers on the east coast have been embanked, thus 
largely eliminating the flood problem. However the 
embankments need to be raised and strengthened 
to latest standards to continue to provide protection 
against floods and erosion. This region covers the 
states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, Orissa, Maharashtra, Gujarat and parts of 
Madhya Pradesh. The region does not have serious 
flood problem except that some of the rivers in 
Orissa State namely Mahanadi, Brahmini, Baitarni, 
and Subarnarekha are prone to floods every
year. The delta and coastal areas of the states on 
the east coast periodically face flood and drainage 
problems in the wake of monsoon depression and 
cyclonic storms. The problem is accentuated when 
the floods synchronize with high tide. The rivers 
Tapi and Narmada, are occasionally in high floods 
affecting areas in the lower reaches in Gujarat.
1.3 Flooding/Drainage Congestion/
Erosion in Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands and Lakshadweep 
The Andaman and Nicobar archipelago consists 
of 572 islands, islets and coral rocks spreading over 
a stretch of 726 Km in the Bay of Bengal, out of 
which, 38 are inhabited. The population has settled 
in the plain table areas all along the coastline. The 
islands may be categorised as heavy rainfall area 
with average annual rainfall of 318 cms. The coastline 
of the islands is deeply indented and broken by 
creeks, backwaters and lagoons on both sides. 
When incessant rains synchronise with high tide, 
the settlements along the coastline and creeks go 
under water. Some areas/islands have poor natural 
drainage caused by peculiar geographical features 
and soil characteristics. These are vulnerable to 
flooding in case of heavy downpour. Storm surges, 
associated with cyclones, also cause inundation 
and erosion in areas along the sea coast.
Lakshadweep, a group of Islands, is located 
200-300 km off the coast of Kerala in the Arabian 
sea. The total geographical area is 32 sq km. Out of 
the 36 islands, 11 are inhabited. The average annual 
rainfall varies from 1100-1850 mm. The islands are 
affected by sea erosion and inundation in times of 
high tides.
1.4 Flash Floods
Flash floods are characterised by very fast 
rise and recession of flow of small volume and high
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
4
discharge, which causes high damages because 
of suddenness. This occurs in hilly and not too 
hilly regions and sloping lands where heavy rainfall 
and thunderstorms or cloudbursts are common. 
Depression and cyclonic storms in the coastal areas 
of Orissa, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
and Tamil Nadu also cause flash floods. Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Orissa, Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, the Western Ghats in Maharastra and 
Kerala are more vulnerable to flash floods caused 
by cloud bursts. Sudden release of waters from 
upstream reservoirs, breaches in landslide dams 
and embankments on the banks of the rivers leads 
to disastrous floods. Severe floods in Himachal 
Pradesh in August 2000 and June 2005, and in 
Arunachal Pradesh in 2000 are a few examples of 
flash floods caused by breaches in landslide dams. 
Floods in Assam, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa and 
Andhra Pradesh are generally caused by breaches 
in embankments. Incidents of high intensity rainfall 
over short durations, which cause flash floods even 
in the area where rains are rare phenomena, are on 
the rise and the problem needs to be tackled in a 
scientific manner.
i) Flash floods forecasting and warning 
systems using Doppler radars will be 
installed by the India Meteorological 
Department (IMD) by September 2009.
ii) As a preventive measure, the inhabitation 
of low-lying areas along the rivers, nallas 
and drains will be regulated by the state 
governments/State Disaster Management 
Authorities (SDMAs)/District Disaster 
Management Authorities (DDMAs).
iii) Landslides and blockages in rivers will be 
monitored by the Central Water Commission 
(CWC)/National Remote Sensing Agency 
(NRSA)/state governments/SDMAs with 
the help of satellite imageries and in case 
of their occurrence, warning systems will 
be set up to reduce losses. If possible,
appropriate structural measures to eliminate 
the damage in case of sudden collapse of 
the blockages will also be taken up.
1.5 Area Prone to Floods
The details of annual damage due to floods 
are available from the year 1953 onwards. The 
maximum area affected due to floods in any one of 
the years under consideration which has not been 
effectively protected, is taken as the area liable 
to flood in that state. Considering all such figures 
for all the States for the period from 1953 to 1978, 
the Rashtriya Barh Ayog (RBA) has assessed the 
total area liable to flood in the country as 400 lakh 
hectares. About 80 per cent of this, i.e., 320 lakh 
hectares areas could be provided with reasonable 
degree of protection. The severity of the problem 
can be appreciated that this area constitutes about 
1/8th of the total geographical area of the country. 
In recent years, areas not prone to floods are also 
getting flooded. An indicative map showing flood 
prone areas in India is given in Annex– I/I. The Statewise break up of areas prone to floods is given in 
Annex– I/II. In recent years, areas once considered 
free from floods are also getting flooded. 
The Ministry of Water Resources (MOWR) and 
the state governments/SDMAs/DDMAs concerned 
will urgently undertake identification of areas prone 
to floods along with names of villages/talukas or 
tehsils/districts in a scientific manner in collaboration 
with the NRSA and Survey of India( SOI).
1.6 Damages Caused by Floods
More than the loss of life and damage to
property, the sense of insecurity and fear in the 
minds of people living in the flood plains is a cause 
of great concern. The after effects of floods such 
as the agony of survivors, spread of epidemics, non 
availability of drinking water, essential commodities 
and medicines, loss of the dwellings etc. make 
floods the most feared among the natural disasters 
Floods-Status and Context
5
faced by mankind. Heavy flood damages had 
occurred in the country during the monsoons of the 
years 1955, 1971, 1973, 1977, 1978, 1980, 1984, 
1988, 1989, 1998 and 2004. Highlights of the flood 
damages are given below:
Maximum Average
Area affected 
(in lakh hectares)
 175 (1978) 75.1 
Crop area affected 
(in lakh hectares)
101.5 (1988) 35.1 
Population affected 
(in crores)
7.045 (1978) 3.284 
Houses damaged 
(in lakhs)
35.1 (1978) 12.2
Cattle heads lost 618248 (1979) 94830 
Human lives lost 11316 (1977) 1587 
Damage to public 
utilities (in Rs. 
crores)
 5604.46 (1998) 820.67 
Total damages (in 
Rs. crores)
 8864.54 (1998) 1805.18 
A statement showing flood damage during the 
1953 to 2005 is given in Annex– I/III.
There is lack of documentation on floods 
and flood damage. The state governments will 
ensure that each and every flood event is properly 
documented and flood damage assessment is 
made on a scientific basis with the help of latest 
technological advancements in the field of remote 
sensing through satellites etc.
1.7 Drainage Congestion and Waterlogging
An area is said to be waterlogged when the 
water table rises to an extent that the soil pores in the 
root zone of a crop become saturated, resulting in 
restriction of the normal circulation of air, decline in 
the level of oxygen and increase in the level of carbon 
dioxide. Drainage congestion and consequent 
water-logging may be either due to surface flooding 
or rise in water table, as a result of excess inflow 
as compared to outflow which may be either on 
account of excess rain and/ or over-irrigation. 
Various agencies/ committees/commissions have 
studied the problem and assessed the area liable 
to water-logging in the country. The Irrigation 
Commission (1972) estimated the total area 
liable to water-logging in the country as 48.4 lakh 
hectares. The National Commission on Agriculture 
(1976) estimated total waterlogged area as 60 lakh 
hectares. The Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) made a 
reassessment in 1984-85 and revised the estimate 
of the area suffering from drainage congestion and 
water logging as 85.3 lakh hectares. As per latest 
figures reported by the states, the total area prone 
to water logging/drainage congestion is 90 lakh 
hectares. State wise breakup is at Annex-I/IV.
The MOWR along with the MOA and the state 
governments will, by the end of March 2008, make 
a scientific assessment of the area suffering from 
drainage congestion and water-logging.
1.8 River Erosion
The erosion of banks by the rivers and the 
consequent loss of life and property are major 
problems. Rivers tend to erode their beds and 
banks in the hilly regions resulting in the deepening 
and widening of rivers. When a river enters the flood 
plains, it shows a tendency to braid and develop 
number of channels causing silting of the riverbed, 
change in course and bank erosion. In the plains, a 
river shows a meandering tendency with meanders 
moving downstream causing erosion on the 
concave and deposition on the convex side and cut 
offs. This causes large-scale bank erosion. In deltaic 
reaches near the outfall into sea, the river divides 
itself into a number of branches resulting in bank 
erosion. Thus bank erosion and consequent loss 
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
6
of land and properties is a constant phenomenon 
all along the course of the river. The study of the 
problem and remedial measures for training of the 
river into defined channel has gained importance 
due to increase in population pressure and want 
of alternative sources of livelihood for the people 
whose land and properties are lost to rivers. 
The MOWR along with the state governments 
will undertake river-wise studies of the problem of 
erosion and estimate the area liable to erosion by 
rivers, identify vulnerable spots and plan remedial 
measures to protect such areas. Latest technological 
developments for low cost measures, such as 
reinforced cement concrete (RCC) porcupines, will 
be considered while planning such measures. 
1.9 Urban Flooding
Historically, civilisations have developed along 
river courses. Towns have grown faster on account 
of increase/influx of population. Owing to lack of 
regulation/control, there has been considerable 
encroachment of flood plains. Damages become 
serious as a result of inadequate capacity of 
storm water drainage system. The problem of 
urban flooding has become serious as evidenced 
by the floods in Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai, 
Vadodara, Ahmedabad, Surat, Kolkata, Hyderabad, 
Visakhapatnam and Vijayawada. The National 
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) has, in 
recognition of the dimensions, this phenomenon 
has acquired, identified urban flooding as a distinct 
discipline, in regard to the management of which 
separate guidelines will be formulated and issued 
soon.
1.10 Littoral Drift in River Estuaries
The flood problems of deltaic regions are 
attributed to various causes like flatter slope of drains 
and back flow due to tides. Littoral drift of sand in 
the form of sand dunes formation and consequent 
choking of outfalls of rivers into the sea is one of the 
causes for flood in deltaic regions. The Biccavole 
and Tulabhaga drains in the Godavari eastern delta 
and the Panchanadi, Lower Kowsika, Vasalatippa 
and Kunavaram drains in Godavari central delta are 
some of the problem reaches.
Straight cuts into the sea with a view to make 
the slope steeper in outfall reaches are sometimes 
considered as an effective measure to overcome 
the problem. These measures must be taken only 
after an intensive study on the mathematical and 
hydraulic models is carried out so as to avoid the 
risk of increased flooding in case of high tides, 
cyclonic storms and tsunamis.
1.11 Snow-melt/Glacial Lake Outbursts, 
Formation and Subsequent Bursting of Landslide Dams
Snowmelt is a gradual process and usually 
does not cause major floods. Glacial melt is usually 
slower than snowmelt and is not capable of causing 
severe flood. But sometimes glaciers hold large 
quantity of bounded water, which may be suddenly 
released with melting of ice block resulting into 
Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs). The rivers 
originating from the Himalayas in the northern 
part of the country, which are also fed by snowmelt from glaciers, are prone to flash floods. In 
1929, the outburst of the Chong Khundam glacier 
(Karakoram) caused a flood peak of over 22,000 
m3 / second at Attock. Glacial outburst is one of the 
suspected reasons for the flash flood experienced 
in Sutlej River on the night intervening 31July and 
1 August 2000. The blockage in the course of the 
Parechu in China (Tibet) caused by the landslide in 
2004 gave way in 2005 and caused severe flooding 
and damage to infrastructure in Himachal Pradesh. 
While the guidelines for landslides will be issued 
by the NDMA separately the MOWR/CWC and the 
state governments will, in collaboration with NRSA, 
Floods-Status and Context
7
monitor the hilly areas liable to snow avalanches, 
blockages in rivers due to landslides etc for such 
events and in the case of their occurrences, install 
warning systems for reducing the loss of life and 
property in the areas likely to be affected. They will 
also take remedial structural measures, if feasible, 
for averting the danger.
1.12 Monsoon/Cyclones/Cyclonic Circulations 
Floods in the Indian river basins are also caused 
by rainstorms which are generally associated 
with low-pressure systems like well-marked lows, 
depressions or tropical cyclones. During the past 
100 years, over 1000 tropical cyclones, depressions 
and low-pressure systems originating in the Bay of 
Bengal and Arabian Sea moved across the Indian 
subcontinent. Nearly 466 cyclones of which about 
40 per cent were severe, affected the country during 
the past century. The passage of such storms in 
quick succession over a river basin invariably leads 
to severe floods. Parts of the country, mainly the 
coastal areas of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Orissa, 
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal, experience such 
cyclones leading to extensive flooding. The flood 
caused by the super cyclone combined with a huge 
storm surge during October 1999 in the coastal belt 
of Orissa was the worst in recent history. 
Guidelines on this subject will be issued 
separately by the NDMA.
1.13 Cloudbursts
Due to peculiar climatic conditions, some parts 
of the country experience sudden unprecedented 
heavy rain known as cloud bursts. Principal rain 
bearing meteorological systems that lead to short 
duration heavy rainfall and which may also cause 
floods are:
(i) monsoon depressions.
(ii) fluctuations in the intensity and location 
of the monsoon trough over the plains of 
India.
(iii) a mid-troposphere circulation/low pressure 
off the coasts of India particularly over 
Gujarat.
(iv) off shore vortices.
Apart from these, land-based lows or 
depressions during monsoon cyclones and 
persistence of low pressure areas over adjoining 
coastal areas may sometimes lead to floods. 
Hilly areas in Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 
the northern areas of West Bengal, Sikkim, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland and Tripura and the coastal areas in the 
states of West Bengal, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and 
Gujarat and Union Territories (UTs) of Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands and Lakhshadweep are more 
prone to such phenomena. Such events have also 
occurred in the states of Rajasthan, Chattisgarh, 
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.
The IMD and CWC in association with 
state governments will develop forecasting and 
warning systems in areas prone to floods caused 
by cloudbursts.
1.14 International Dimensions of the 
Flood Hazard
The rivers originating in China, Nepal and Bhutan 
cause severe floods in the states of Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh and Assam. 
For flood management (FM), cooperation with the 
neighbouring countries viz. China(Tibet), Nepal and 
Bhutan is essential. 
Negotiations upon issues such as establishment 
of hydro-meteorological stations and transmission of 
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
8
their data to India on a real time basis, afforestation, 
catchment area treatment (CAT) works and 
construction of reservoirs will be expedited by the 
MOWR and Ministry of External Affairs (MEA).
1.15 Past Initiatives of the Government 
of India
The Government of India (GOI) has taken a 
number of initiatives in the field of FM and appointed 
many committees/working groups/task forces from 
time to time to look into the problem of floods and 
suggest remedial measures for their management. 
It has also issued a number of policy statements 
in this regard. Some of the important committees/
working groups/task forces appointed and the policy 
statements made by the GOI are listed as follows:
•	 The Policy Statement – 1954 and
Supplementary Statement -1956.
•	 The High Level Committee on Floods –
1957 and Policy Statement of – 1958.
•	 The Ministers’ Committee on Flood Control
- 1964.
•	 The Working Groups on Flood Control for
the Five-Year Plans.
•	 The Rashtriya Barh Ayog – 1980.
•	 The Pritam Singh Committee Report –
1980.
•	 The National Water Policy -1987.
•	 The Report of the Committee on Flood
Management in the North-Eastern States 
– 1988.
•	 The Report of the Committee on FM in the
states of Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh 
and Orissa – 1988.
•	 The Regional Task Forces -1996.
•	 The Experts’ Committee for Bank Erosion
Problem of River Ganga-Padma in the 
Districts of Malda and Murshidabad in 
West Bengal -1996. 
•	 The National Commission for Integrated
Water Resources Development Plan 
-1999.
•	 The Expert Group for Flood Management
in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar – 1999.
•	 The Working Group on Flood Control
Programme for the Tenth Five-Year Plan –
2001.
•	 Report of the Committee on Silting of
Rivers in India – 2002.
•	 National Water Policy – 2002.
•	 The Expert Committee to Review the
Implementation of the Recommendations 
of Rashtriya Barh Ayog – 2003. 
•	 The Committee for Identification of critical
Anti-Erosion Schemes of Ganga Basin 
States for Inclusion in centrally sponsored 
scheme to be implemented during Tenth 
Plan – 2003.
•	 Report of the Technical Group on Flood
and Erosion Problems of North Bengal –
July 2004. 
•	 The Task Force on Flood Management/
Erosion Control -2004.
While the Policy Statement -1954 was the first 
major initiative by the GOI taken up after the floods of 
1954, other important committees appointed by the 
Government of India are the High Level Committee 
Floods-Status and Context
9
on Floods-1957, the Ministers’ Committee on Flood
Control-1964, the Rashtriya Barh Ayog-1980 and the 
Task Force on Flood Management/Erosion Control 
-2004. Brief particulars relating to the reports of 
these Committees are in Annex-I/V
1.16 Implementation of the Recommendations of the Experts’ Committees/Working Groups/Task 
Forces
The implementation of the recommendations 
of various committees/ working groups/task forces 
has been rather slow and action on a majority of 
them has not been taken or at best taken partially 
due to various administrative, social, financial and 
political reasons. After the Policy Statement of 
1954 and Supplementary Statement of 1956, High 
Level Committee on Flood Control-1957, Ministers’
Committee on Floods-1964 were the important 
initiatives taken by the GOI. The GOI set up the RBA 
in 1976 to study in depth the approach towards 
programmes of flood control measures, their 
effectiveness and recommend future measures 
and the National policy to be followed so as to 
progressively mitigate the resultant damage from 
floods. The RBA, looked into the problem of floods 
in the whole of the country in a most comprehensive 
manner. It took into account the recommendations 
of the various past committees and the status of 
implementation thereof and submitted its report in 
1980. The report contained 207 recommendations, 
implementation of which has been reviewed from 
time to time. The latest one was by the Experts’
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri. R. 
Rangachari former Member, CWC in 2003. It 
noted that the implementation has been slow and 
identified 40 recommendations, which need to be 
followed. These are given in Annex-I/VI. The brief 
details of the most important ones, which need to 
be followed, are as follows:- 
•	 Flood damage assessment be made on a 
realistic and scientific basis and recorded 
basin-/sub-basin-wise.
•	 Performance evaluation of a large number
of FM schemes be carried out and their 
impact on the socio economic development 
of the protected area be assessed.
•	 The use of flood plains be regulated and
a suitable legislation for flood plain zoning 
be enacted and enforced.
•	 WaterResourcesplanningandconstruction
be basin wise and basin organisations be 
set up.
•	 Storages in various forms is an important
component of the package of measures 
for FM and flood space in reservoirs be 
provided to the extent feasible and flood 
control not relegated to a non- priority 
activity as against competing water 
requirements for hydropower and Irrigation 
purposes.
•	 International dimensions of problem of
floods be kept in mind and the GOI should 
play an important role in the matter. 
•	 Requisite funds be made available for
construction of new and maintenance of 
existing works.
•	 Emphasis be laid on research, education
and training on FM. 
The Task Force on Flood Control/Erosion 
Control considered the status of implementation 
of recommendations of all the past committees/
working groups/ task forces and submitted its 
report to the MOWR in December 2004. The MOWR 
is in the process of taking appropriate action on its 
various recommendations.
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
10
 The MOWR and the CWC will, in collaboration 
with the state governments, closely monitor the 
implementation of the recommendations of the 
Experts Committee to review the implementation of 
the recommendations of the RBA-2003 and the Task 
Force on Flood Management/Erosion Control-2004.
1.17 Achievements in Respect of Flood 
Management.
1.17.1 Structural Measures
Since 1954, 33,928 km of new embankments 
and 38,809 km of drainage channels have been 
constructed in the country. In addition, 2,450 
town protection works have been completed and 
4,721 villages have been raised above flood levels. 
Barring occasional breaches in embankments, 
these works have given reasonable protection to an 
area of about 18.22 million hectares. The state-wise 
progress of FM works is given in Annex-I/VII
1.17.2 Non-structural Measures
The MOWR and CWC had circulated in 1975, 
the draft bill for flood plain zoning regulations to the 
state governments for enactment and enforcement. 
However their response is not satisfactory. Rajasthan 
and Manipur are the only states which have passed 
the bill but steps for its enforcement have not been 
taken.
The CWC has established a flood forecasting 
system comprising 175 stations on all major interstate rivers and is implementing the scheme for 
its modernisation and expansion. The MOWR had 
launched a centrally sponsored scheme for raising 
of villages/construction of ring bunds etc, in U.P. and 
Bihar. The scheme was, however, discontinued in the 
Tenth Plan pending evaluation of the performance 
of the works executed under it.
1.18 Gaps in Flood Management 
•	 Non-availability of close contour maps and
digital elevation models of flood prone 
areas are impediments to make reliable 
forecasts of the area likely to be inundated 
corresponding to expected river water 
levels.
•	 Flood forecasting and warning (FF and W)
network of the CWC, though developed 
on scientific basis, does not cover all the 
flood prone rivers and rivulets. Most of the 
state governments do not have their own 
reliable FF and W networks.
•	 Even the FF and W network of the CWC is
mostly based on hydro-meteorological data 
recorded by observers and communicated 
by wireless and/or telephone. Very few river 
basins have been covered with automatic 
sensors for observations and telemetry 
system for communication of data.
•	 Though web-based system of
communication of forecasts has been 
developed by the CWC in the last two-three 
years, it is yet to be made fully functional.
•	 Flood plain zoning regulations have not
been enacted and enforced by most of the 
states, although a draft bill was circulated 
to them by the MOWR and CWC in 1975 
and in spite of such recommendations of 
various committees/ task forces/ working 
groups etc.
•	 Implementation of the flood proofing
measures such as raising of villages, 
constructions of floods shelters, making 
public utility installations flood safe 
by the state governments, is far from 
satisfactory.
Floods-Status and Context
11
•	 Operation of reservoirs is often carried out
disregarding flood moderation aspects 
and there is lack of flow of information 
among the basin-states resulting in gaps 
in preparedness on their part to face 
incoming floods.
•	 There is also a lack of inflow forecasting
systems for the reservoirs resulting in 
sudden release of large quantity of water 
causing floods in the downstream. Dam 
safety aspects are also often not given due 
importance by the state governments.
•	 Though sufficient progress has been
made in respect of structural measures of 
flood management and an area of 182.2 
lakh hectare has been provided with 
reasonable degree of protection against 
floods, the remaining flood prone area is 
yet to be protected.
•	 Rivers erode a significant amount of land
every year. Conventional anti-erosion 
measures often induce erosion in the 
upstream and downstream or on the 
opposite bank of the river and these require 
high investment. There is a need to evolve 
economical and eco-friendly measure for 
prevention of river-erosion. 
•	 The flood response system lacks
public participation. There is also lack 
of awareness among the people about 
simple ways of safeguarding their lives 
and properties during floods. They are 
also not aware of the role they can play in 
the preparedness, mitigation, rescue and 
relief during floods.
•	 Flood management measures are
generally planned on an adhoc basis to 
give immediate relief on public demand. 
The problem and impact of the measures 
adopted especially the embankments and 
anti-erosion works in adjoining areas is 
not comprehensively studied on scientific 
basis.
•	 There is no proper documentation about
floods, their impact and the manner 
in which these were tackled. Proper 
documentation will go a long way in 
improving the preparedness, mitigation 
and response system.
1.19 Approach to Guidelines
•	 Though sufficient knowledge about floods
and their management is available with 
different orgnisations and the communities 
and the problem of floods has been 
studied by a number of committees, task 
forces, working groups and commissions 
and recommendations have been made 
about the measures for their management, 
yet there are no set guidelines to be 
followed by the various central ministries 
and departments, state governments and 
other stakeholders, on the basis of which, 
they can formulate their flood management 
plans (FMPs). These guidelines have been 
formulated to address this gap. 
•	 With the enactment of the Disaster
Management (DM) Act in December 2005 
and constitution of the NDMA, there has 
been a paradigm shift from erstwhile 
relief-centric approach to the entire DM 
continuum with equal emphasis being 
given on preparedness, prevention and 
mitigation along with response and relief. 
•	 The FM guidelines emphasis on measures
for preparedness, prevention, mitigation in 
the pre-floods stage and on prompt and 
effective response, relief and recovery 
during – and post floods stages.
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
12
•	 The emphasis of the state governments
has so far been on structural measures 
of FM requiring huge investment and long 
gestation period. They have not given due 
importance to non-structural measures, 
which are very effective in reducing loss of 
life and properties and do not require huge 
investment and can be implemented in a 
short time. These guidelines emphasise 
on their time bound implementation by the 
central ministries and departments and 
the state governments.
•	 The guidelines recogonise the fact that
there is a lack of coordination among the 
agencies of the central government and 
the state governments as well as among 
the various departments of the state 
government. These also recognise lack 
of institutional framework for coordinating 
the efforts of various agencies and 
lay emphasis on setting up basin-wise 
organisations for FM and a National Flood 
Management Institute (NFMI) for training, 
education and research in FM. The 
mechanisms for inter-state and intra-state 
coordination have also been proposed.
•	 The financial aspects for implementation
of FMPs by the central ministries and 
departments and the state governments 
have also been covered in the guidelines.
•	 The guidelines have been evolved with the
active participation of all the stakeholders 
i.e the central ministries and departments, 
the state governments, academics, 
experts, NGOs, corporate sector and 
eminent people.
•	 The timelines proposed for the
implementation of various activities in the 
guidelines are considered both important 
and desirable, especially in case of those 
non-structural measures for which no 
clearances are required from central or other 
agencies. Precise schedules for structural 
measures will, however, be evolved in 
the FMPs that will be formulated at the 
central ministries/states level duly taking 
into account the availability of financial, 
technical and managerial resources. In case 
of compelling circumstances warranting 
a change, consultation with NDMA will 
be undertaken, well in advance, for any 
adjustment, on a case to case basis.
•	 The guidelines will lead to the formulation
of FMPs by the central ministries and 
departments, the state governments and 
other stakeholders, implementation of 
which is expected to assist the process 
of minimising vulnerability to floods 
and consequent loss of lives, livelihood 
systems, property and damage to 
infrastructure and public utilities and thus 
make India flood resilient.
Floods-Status and Context
13
1.20 Action Plan
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
14
Institutional Framework and 2 Financial Arrangements
2.1 Constitutional Provisions
The subject of flood control, unlike irrigation, 
does not figure as such in any of the three legislative 
lists included in the Constitution of India. However, 
Drainage and Embankments, are the two measures 
specifically mentioned in entry 17 of List II (State 
List), reproduced below:
‘Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation 
and canals, drainage and embankments, water 
storage and water power subject to the provision of 
entry 56 of List I (Union List).’
Entry 56 of List I (Union List) reads as 
follows:
‘Regulation and development of inter-State 
rivers and river valleys to the extent to which such 
regulation and development under the control of 
the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be 
expedient in the public interest.’
The primary responsibility for flood control thus 
lies with the states. 
2.2 National Institutions/Agencies
2.2.1 National Disaster Management Authority
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 (DM 
Act,2005) lays down institutional, legal, financial 
and coordination mechanisms at the national, 
state, district and local levels. The new institutional 
framework will ensure operationalisation of the 
national desire for a paradigm shift in DM from a 
post event and relief-centric syndrome to a regime 
that lays greater emphasis on preparedness, 
prevention and mitigation, leading to a more prompt 
and effective response to disasters.
The NDMA, as the main body under the GOI, 
has the responsibility of laying down policies, 
plans and guidelines for DM and coordinating their 
enforcement and implementation for ensuring a 
timely and effective response to disasters. It will 
approve the national DM plan prepared by the 
National Executive Committee (NEC) and plans of 
the central ministries and departments. The NDMA 
may take such other measures, as it may consider 
necessary, for the prevention of disasters, or 
mitigation, or preparedness and capacity building, 
for dealing with a threatening disaster situation 
or disaster. Its statutory functions include the 
responsibility to:
a) lay down policies on DM;
b) approve the national plan and the plans 
prepared by the central ministries/
departments in accordance with the 
national plan;
c) lay down guidelines to be followed by the 
state authorities in drawing up the state 
plans;
d) lay down guidelines to be followed by the 
different central ministries/departments for 
the purpose of integrating the measures 
for prevention of disaster or the mitigation 
of its effects in their development plans 
and projects;
Institutional Framework and Financial Arrangements
15
e) coordinate the enforcement and 
implementation of the policy and plan for 
DM;
f) recommend provision of funds for the 
purpose of mitigation;
g) provide such support to other countries 
affected by major disasters as may be 
determined by the central government;
h) take such other measures for the 
prevention of disaster, or its mitigation, or 
preparedness and capacity building for 
dealing with a threatening disaster situation 
or disaster as it may consider necessary;
i) lay down broad policies and guidelines for 
the functioning of the National Institute of 
Disaster Management(NIDM);
j) authorise the concerned department or 
authority to make emergency procurement 
of provisions or materials for rescue and 
relief in a threatening disaster situation or 
disaster;
k) exercise general superintendence, 
direction and control of the National 
Disaster Response Force (NDRF), 
constituted under the Act for the purpose 
of specialist response to a threatening 
disaster situation or disaster;
l) recommend guidelines for the minimum 
standards of relief to be provided to the 
persons affected by disasters.
In essence, the NDMA will concentrate on 
prevention, preparedness, mitigation, rehabilitation, 
reconstruction and recovery and also formulate 
appropriate policies and guidelines for effective
and synergised national disaster response and 
relief. It will also coordinate the enforcement and 
implementation of policies and plans.
2.2.2 National Executive Committee
The National Executive Committee (NEC) 
comprises the secretary to the GOl in the ministry 
or department having administrative control of 
the subject of DM, as the chairperson and the 
secretaries to the GOl in the ministries/departments 
of Agriculture, Atomic Energy, Defence, Drinking 
Water Supply, Environment and Forests, Finance 
(Expenditure), Health, Power, Rural Development, 
Science and Technology, Space, Communications, 
Urban Development, Water Resources and the 
Chief of the Integrated Defence Staff to Chairman of 
the Chiefs of Staff Committee as members. It is the 
executive committee of the NDMA, and is statutorily 
mandated to assist the Authority in the discharge 
of its functions and ensure compliance of the 
directions issued by the central government, apart 
from preparing the National Plan and securing its 
approval by the NDMA and performing such other 
functions as required by the NDMA. Based on the 
policy and guidelines, the NEC will be responsible 
for preparing the national plan, getting it approved 
by the NDMA and then operationalising it. The NEC 
will also require any department or agency of the 
government to make available such men or material 
resources for the purposes of handling threatening 
disasters, emergency response, rescue and relief, 
as required by the NDMA. It will coordinate the 
response in the event of any threatening disaster 
situation or disaster. It will also perform such other 
functions as the NDMA may require it to perform.
2.2.3 National Disaster Response Force
For the purpose of specialised response to a 
threatening disaster situation or disasters both natural 
and man-made, the DM Act, 2005 has mandated 
the creation of a National Disaster Response Force 
(NDRF). The general superintendence, direction and 
control of this force shall be vested in and exercised 
by the NDMA and the command and supervision 
of the NDRF shall vest in an officer to be appointed 
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
16
by the central government as the Director General 
of the NDRF.
2.2.4 Central Government 
In accordance with the provisions of the DM 
Act 2005, the central government will take all such 
measures, as it deems necessary or expedient, for 
the purpose of DM and will coordinate actions of all 
agencies. It will ensure that central ministries and 
departments integrate measures for the prevention 
and mitigation of disasters into their developmental 
plans and projects, make appropriate allocation 
of funds for pre-disaster requirements and take 
necessary measures for preparedness to effectively 
respond to any disaster situation or disaster. As FM 
is a multi-disciplinary process, all central ministries 
and departments concerned will play a key role in 
assisting the NDMA in the discharge of its functions. 
The nodal ministry for the disaster management 
is the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), the MOWR 
along with other department is responsible for 
the technical aspects of FM besides others. The 
Ministries of Agriculture, Civil Aviation, Environment 
and Forests, Health, Space, Earth Sciences, 
Mines, Railways etc. also have important role in 
management of floods in their respective fields.
2.2.5 National Institute of Disaster Management 
The National Institute of Disaster Management 
(NIDM), which functions within the framework of 
the broad policy and guidelines laid down by the 
NDMA, has capacity development as one of its 
major responsibilities, along with training, research, 
documentation and the development of a national 
level information base. 
It will network with other knowledge-based 
institutions and assist in imparting training to trainers, 
DM officials, etc. It will also be responsible for 
synthesising research activities and will be geared 
towards emerging as a ‘centre of excellence’ at the 
national and international levels.
2.2.6 The Central Flood Control Board 
(CFCB)/Irrigation Ministers Conference
In 1954, when for the first time the flood 
programme in the country attracted the serious 
attention of the GOI, the Central Flood Control Board 
(CFCB) was constituted to draw up a comprehensive 
plan of flood control with the following functions: -
(i) to lay down general principles and 
policies in connection with flood control 
measures;
(ii) to consider and approve master plans for 
flood control submitted by the states/river 
commission; and
(iii) to arrange for necessary assistance in 
connection with planning and execution of 
flood control works.
As a follow-up to a decision of the CFCB in 
1954, a Flood Wing was added to the then Central 
Water and Power Commission; the Flood Wing 
served as the Secretariat of the CFCB.
In 1977, it was decided to merge the CFCB 
with the Conference of State Ministers of Irrigation. 
The first meeting after the amalgamation of the 
CFCB with the ministers’ conference was held in 
February 1979; thereafter the meeting has been 
held almost every year.
2.2.7 Central Water Commission
The Central Water Commission (CWC) is an 
apex agency in the field of water resources including 
flood management in India. The River Management 
Wing headed by the Member (RM) and ex-officio 
Institutional Framework and Financial Arrangements
17
Additional Secretary to the Government of India 
looks after FM in the country excepting the Ganga 
and the Brahmaputra river basins for which the 
GOI has created separate organisations. Member 
(RM) is required to advise the MOWR and also look 
after policy issues and other aspects of the FM 
in the whole country including the Ganga and the 
Brahmaputra basins. This wing is also responsible 
for flood forecasting and the hydrological 
observations’ network in the country. It has offices 
under its control throughout India for performing 
these functions.
The MOWR will strengthen and equip 
appropriately the RM wing of CWC. 
2.2.8 Ganga Flood Control Commission/
Ganga Flood Control Board
The Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC) 
was set up by GOI in 1972 for the preparation of 
comprehensive plan of flood control for Ganga basin 
and to draw out a phased coordinated programme 
for the implementation of works. It has also been 
assigned the work of monitoring and appraisal of 
FM schemes of Ganga basin states. The Task Force 
on Flood Management/Erosion control – 2004 has 
recommended its strengthening to enable it to play 
a more effective role in FM in the Ganga basin. 
The MOWR will take steps for strengthening 
the GFCC appropriately. 
2.2.9 Brahmaputra Board/High Powered 
Review Board 
 Floods and erosion in the Brahmaputra and 
Barak basins are regional problems. Both, the 
Brahmaputra and the Barak and most of their major 
tributaries are inter-state as they flow in more than 
one state. The Brahmaputra Board was set up by 
the GOI as a statutory body, under the Brahmaputra 
Board Act, 1980. The Board was to perform such 
functions and exercise such powers as the central 
government may specify from time to time by 
notification in the official Gazette. It has been given 
the task of carrying out surveys and investigations 
in the Brahmaputra valley and preparing a Master 
Plan for control of floods, bank erosion and 
improvement of drainage, planning and integrated 
implementation of measures for control of floods 
and bank erosion in the Brahmaputra and Bark 
valleys. The Board, with the approval of the central 
government, is also to take up the construction of 
multipurpose dams and works connected therewith 
proposed in the Master Plan and operate such 
dams and works. The Board consists of four fulltime members i.e chairman, vice-chairman, general 
manager and financial advisor to be appointed by the 
GOI and part-time members one each to represent 
respectively the state governments of Assam, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Mizoram, Sikkim, Manipur, 
Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh and West Bengal and 
the central ministries dealing with Water Resources, 
Transport, Agriculture, Power and Finance and the 
central government departments namely the CWC, 
the Central Electricity Authority(CEA), the Geological 
Survey of India(GSI) and the IMD. The Task Force 
on Flood Management/Erosion control – 2004 has 
recommended its restructuring/strengthening. 
The MOWR will take immediate action for 
restructuring/strengthening of the Brahmaputra 
Board. 
2.2.10 India Meteorological Department 
The IMD established in 1875, is responsible 
for the National Meteorological Service and the 
principal government agency in all matters relating 
to meteorology, seismology and allied subjects. 
The IMD is mandated as follows:
•	 To take meteorological observations
and to provide current and forecast 
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
18
meteorological information for optimum 
operation of weather-sensitive activities like 
agriculture, irrigation, shipping, aviation, 
offshore oil explorations, etc. 
•	 Towarnagainstsevereweatherphenomena
like tropical cyclones, northwesterly dust 
storms, heavy rains and snow, cold and 
heat waves, etc., which cause destruction 
of life and property. 
•	 To provide meteorological statistics
required for agriculture, water resource 
management, industries, oil exploration 
and other nation building activities. 
•	 To conduct and promote research in
meteorology and allied disciplines. 
•	 To detect and locate earthquakes and to
evaluate seismicity in different parts of the 
country for development projects.
For the convenience of administrative 
and technical control, there are six Regional 
Meteorological Centres (RMCs) located at 
Mumbai, Chennai, New Delhi, Kolkata, Nagpur and 
Guwahati. Under each RMC, there are different 
types of operational units such as meteorological 
centres at state capitals, forecasting offices, agrometeorological advisory service centres, flood 
meteorological offices (FMOs) and area cyclone 
warning centres. 
2.2.11 National Centre for Medium Range 
Weather Forecasting 
The National Centre for Medium Range 
Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) is the premier 
institution in India under the Department of Science 
and Technology (DST) to provide medium range 
weather forecasts through deterministic methods 
and to render agro advisory services (AAS) to the 
farmers. The centre offers research opportunities in 
numerical weather prediction, diagnostic studies, 
crop weather modeling and computer science.
2.2.12 National Remote Sensing Agency 
The Department of Space has established 
a Decision Support Centre (DSC) at National 
Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) under the Indian 
Space Research Organisation’s (ISRO) disaster 
management support (DMS) programme. DSC is 
an operational service provider for space-enabled 
inputs together with other important data layers for its 
use in disaster management by the central ministries 
and departments and the state governments in predisaster, during disaster and post-disaster phases. 
A VSAT based satellite communication network 
has been put in place for online transfer of spaceenabled inputs to the concerned state and central 
government user departments. The DSC has the 
provision to mobilise aircraft for obtaining aerial 
data. At present, the DSC is addressing natural 
disasters viz. floods, cyclone, drought, forest fires, 
earthquakes and landslides. Besides these, it also 
provides support services for specific events such 
as tsunami impact assessment, monitoring of 
landslide and manmade lakes in the remote areas 
of India and adjoining areas of other countries. Near 
real information on the extent of flood inundation 
derived from space data are made available to the 
NDMA, MHA, CWC and state agencies for planning 
relief and rescue operations.
The DSC is also working on preparation of maps 
showing hazard zonation. Flood hazard zone maps 
for the Brahmaputra river in Assam were prepared. 
Similar maps are also being prepared for Bihar. The 
NRSA also prepares maps in river configuration 
and bank erosion. It also maps flood controls works 
such as embankments and spurs along selected 
river reaches and provides this information the 
concerned departments.
The DSC aims at building a comprehensive
geo-spatial database of the disaster vulnerable 
Institutional Framework and Financial Arrangements
19
regions of the country. As for the 60 odd flood and 
cyclone prone districts a digital database on a scale 
of 1:50,000 was developed.
Capability has been established for acquisition 
of close contour information. Planning is being done 
for systematic acquisition, in a phased manner, of 
close contour information over chronic flood prone 
areas.
2.2.13 National Flood Management Institute
Various Institutes and academic institutions 
deal with different aspects of water resources. The 
MOWR has established the National Water Academy 
(NWA) at Pune under the administrative control of 
the CWC for training the working professionals of 
CWC and the states in different aspects of water 
resources including FM.
There is, however, no national or state level 
institution dealing with all facets of FM exclusively 
and in a holistic and comprehensive manner. 
Such an Institute is required as it can serve the 
purpose of imparting training to the engineers and 
administrators of the central government and the 
state governments in all fields of FM. It can, in a 
subsequent phase, train personnel belonging to the 
police departments, civil defence, home guards, the 
SDMAs, non-governmental organisations(NGOs) and 
also public representatives in flood fighting, rescue 
and relief. It can also undertake activities to create 
awareness among all the stakeholders about their 
role in handling flood events and promote adaptive 
research relating to FM measures including FF&W. 
It will work in close collaboration with other Institutes 
of the central government and state governments, 
especially the institutes proposed for management 
of cyclone disasters and training of NDRF. 
The MOWR in close collaboration with the 
NDMA will establish a National Flood Management 
Institute (NFMI) as a centre of excellence with experts 
as its faculty and having state-of-the-art equipment 
at an appropriate location, in one of the flood prone 
states. The institute will be functional by the end of 
December 2010. Till then the NWA will undertake 
these activities in addition to its current functions.
2.2.14 River Basin Organisations-Interstate Coordination 
FM being a state subject, each state 
government has naturally been dealing with 
it separately and in its own best interests. 
Implications of the measures taken by one state for 
the states located in the upstream or downstream 
have not often been taken into cognisance. It 
has been felt that FM needs to be dealt with in a 
comprehensive way especially on rivers that are 
international/interstate in nature. The rivers Ganga, 
Brahmaputra, Indus etc. originate in neighboring 
countries and information is required from these 
countries for the effective management of floodrelated disasters. These rivers, after entering 
India, flow through many states before out falling 
into the sea. In between, they are joined by many 
tributaries, flowing through more than one state. 
The rivers, which are confined within India, also 
originate in one state and then flow through other 
states before out falling into the sea.
Various committees/task forces/working 
groups appointed by the GOI to look into the problem 
of floods and FM have highlighted the need for basin 
approach to FM. The RBA, the Experts Committee 
on the implementation of the recommendations 
of the RBA, the sub-group on FM for the Eleventh 
Five-Year Plan, etc. have expressed the need for the 
establishment of a central organisation to deal with 
the problem of floods in a comprehensive manner.
The MOWR has set up the Brahmaputra Board 
and GFCC to look after FM in Brahmaputra and
National Disaster Management Guidelines - Management of Floods
20
the Ganga river basins respectively. The MOWR in 
consultation with the state governments, will take 
appropriate action in regard to the establishment of 
such organisations in other flood prone river basins 
and in strengthening of the CWC, Brahmaputra 
Board and GFCC.
2.3 State-level Organisations
2.3.1 Disaster Management Departments/
Commissioners 
Disaster Management departments/
Commissioners in the states deal with rescue/relief 
operations during floods. 
2.3.2 State Disaster Management Authority 
At the state level, the State Disaster Management 
Authority (SDMA), headed by the chief minister will 
be established by the state governments to lay 
down policies and plans for DM in the state. It will, 
inter-alia, approve the state plan in accordance with 
the guidelines laid down by the NDMA, coordinate 
the implementation of the state plan, recommend 
provision of funds for mitigation and preparedness 
measures and review the developmental plans of 
the different departments of the state to ensure 
the integration of prevention, preparedness and 
mitigation measures. 
2.3.3 State Executive Committee 
All state governments will appoint experts 
in FM in the faculty of their administrative training 
institutes, which will collaborate with the NFMI in 
organising the training of personnel in the field of FM.
Every state government will constitute a State 
Executive Committee (SEC) to assist the SDMA 
in the performance of its functions. The SEC 
will be headed by the chief secretary to the 
state government and coordinate and monitor 
the implementation of the national policy, the 
national plan and the state plan. It will also provide 
information to the NDMA relating to different 
aspects of DM.
2.3.4 State Flood Control Boards/State 
Flood Control Technical Advisory 
Committees
Flood being a state subject, FM schemes are 
planned and executed by the State governments. 
The role of the central government is advisory, 
catalytic and promotional in nature. The states have 
to investigate, plan, construct, maintain and operate 
all flood works. Flood Control Boards were set up in 
some of the states along with the CFCB.
2.3.5 Irrigation/Water Resources/Flood 
Control Departments
The nodal organization is the Irrigation 
Department, which may or may not have a separate 
wing dealing with flood control in some states. 
The Public Works Department (PWD) deals with 
all the public works including flood control. In the 
state of West Bengal the Irrigation and Waterways 
Directorate under the Irrigation and Waterways 
Department, deals with irrigation, waterways and 
flood control. The Ministers’ Committee on Flood 
Control, 1964, had stated ‘that at least in the States 
with serious flood problems, proper flood control 
departments should be organized under a Chief 
Engineer with appropriate number of regular field 
circles and divisions to look after investigations, 
construction and maintenance of flood control 
works as distinct from the regular Department’.
2.3.6 District Disaster Management Authority 
At the cutting edge level, the District Disaster 
Management Authority (DDMA) headed by the 
District Magistrate, with the elected representative 
of the local authority as the co-chairperson, will act 
Institutional Framework and Financial Arrangements
21
as the planning, coordinating and implementing 
body for DM and take all necessary measures for 
the purposes of DM in the district in accordance with 
the guidelines laid down by the NDMA and SDMA. It 
will, inter-alia prepare the district DM plan including 
the response plan for the district, coordinate and 
monitor the implementation of the national policy, 
the state policy, the national plan, the state plan and 
the district plan and ensure that the guidelines for 
prevention, mitigation, preparedness and response 
measures laid down by the NDMA and the SDMA 
are followed by all departments of the government 
at the district level and the local authorities in the 
district. 
2.3.7 Local Authorities
 These include Panchayati Raj Institutions 
(PRIs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), such as 
municipal corporations, municipalities, district and 
cantonment boards and town planning authorities 
for control and management of civic services. 
PRIs and ULBs will ensure capacity building of 
their officers and employees in DM, carry out 
relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction activities 
in the affected areas and will prepare DM plans in 
consonance with the guidelines of the NDMA, SDMAs 
and DDMAs. 
2.3.8 State Disaster Response Force
For the purpose of a specialised response to 
a threatening disaster situation or disasters both 
natural and man-made, the DM Act, 2005 has 
mandated the creation of a NDRF . To augment 
their capacities, all state governments/SDMAs will 
organise, from within their armed police force, 
adequate personnel for the constitution of State 
Disaster Response Force (SDRF) with appropriate 
disaster response capabilities. Under the aegis of 
the NDMA, the states will raise the SDRF. 
2.3.9 Intra-state Multi-sectoral Coordination
While the state irrigation/water resources/flood 
control departments are responsible for planning, 
implementation and operation and maintenance 
of structural measures of FM in the state, civil 
authorities at the district/taluka/block/village level 
are responsible for search, rescue and relief. 
Further, the activities of one department, such as the 
construction of roads by the PWD, or railway lines 
by the Ministry of Railways (MOR), urbanisation/
industrialisation regulated by the ULBs and town 
and country planning organisations etc can affect 
the vulnerability of an area to floods and drainage 
congestion. The floods in the Krishna basin in 
2005 are a case in point. It is therefore important 
that a mechanism is established for ensuring 
coordination among the various departments of 
state governments. In most of the flood prone states, 
State Flood Control Advisory Committees have 
been constituted with representatives of the v